the president of the French Republic
Emmanuel macron has made public
commitment after public commitment to
rebuilding the notre-dame Cathedral a
Cathedral that recently burnt down in
the middle of Paris and it's surprising
to me that nobody is questioning the
constitutionality of this commitment
nobody is questioning the moral or
political significance of it in 2019
I had a quotation up from my father
recently in which my father reflected
time of itself changes nothing it is
people people in their actions people in
their deeds that make history time of
itself does nothing at all I'm somewhat
horrified by the passive attitude of
members of my generation that the future
will come about of itself that the
future itself will bring enlightenment
that all of these terrible things from
the medieval past whether in Islam
recently resurgent in Isis the Islamic
state Taliban so forth whether it's the
mean evil past of Islam or the medieval
past of Catholicism and Christianity
that those things will fade away simply
because the number on the calendar gets
higher every year and yes
I'm intensely aware of the irony that
even the numbering of the years in our
society is itself a memorial and a
monument to Jesus Christ and Manuel
Nicole the president of French Republic
has committed his nation in as much this
is power do so or in as much as he can
make the rhetorical claim he's committed
the nation to rebuilding the notre-dame
Cathedral
because it's a monument to France to
what France is and and should be
it's terrifying for me to imagine that
people believe in it's much more likely
that people simply have this passive
attitude that if the taxpayers pour
their money into this monument into this
memorial to this religion that as the
centuries go by somehow someone else
will do the work of creating the secular
society that the French Constitution
promised them that we we don't have to
bother ourselves about making that
change I often find myself saying to
people this is this is 2019 you know if
we're not living in the future who is if
we're not committed to make these
changes here and now what are we going
to do wait centuries and centuries for
some other generation to be enlightened
enough committed enough motivated enough
to make that change at what point do we
draw the line and say making excuses for
the ignorance that the Dark Ages is over
now slavery has its place in museums I
certainly think it's a worthwhile and
important thing to take taxpayers
dollars and to create a museum about
slavery explain to people what was so
terrible about slavery how it worked
examine the past even preserve artifacts
related to that slavery and in the same
sense it would be a wonderful thing if
there were a museum in downtown Paris to
the darkness of the dark ages explain to
you what was so terrible about the
Catholic Church during the fetal period
of our history how it held us back from
making progress for centuries and
centuries the bizarre and perverse ways
in which that faith warped our
perception of reality and made
unbelievably cruel and heinous acts seem
normal for centuries that people were
literally boiled to death in cauldrons
in downtown cities that people were
tortured publicly and broken on the
wheel for crimes that today are
considered trivial they might not even
pay
fine I remember one case of a young man
being broken on the wheel for having
stolen a stack of blank paper and in a
dynamic way
absolutely is linked to to the faith of
Christianity the same faith where their
hero their martyr Jesus Christ was
himself executed by capital punishment
nevertheless became a social philosophy
and legal system and society fixated on
torturing people to death torturing
confessions to people gave a punishment
the way in which this faith that finds
its seed in the New Testament and the
Bible grew into a vine that suffocated
all the creativity out of society that
people were persecuted and interrogated
for heresy for free thinking of any kind
for questioning church doctrine of any
kind the way in which the most absurd
beliefs were inculcated into people as
children and then enforced through very
real violence for centuries and
centuries that's that's a story that a
museum has to tell that is not the story
that the cathedral notre-dame tells at
downtown Paris the cathedral note will
damned if you go to visit it will not
present to you the history of how absurd
it is how telling it is that people once
once believed that this piece of wood
this piece of wood in a in a golden
reliquary that this piece of wood was a
fragment of the one true cross that
people used to come on pilgrimages for
what could only be called a hoax even if
you were a true believing Christian
today in 2019 but you were a somewhat
rational Christian you would have to
recognize that the cult of the reliquary
of pretending that this piece of wood
was actually the wood of the cross that
a so-called historical Jesus was nailed
to him where the wood actually came from
and so on so forth the story behind how
they found this and the second of
putting the church there the real
history there it's sickening it's
shameful I think if anything you'd feel
more ashamed if you were a true
believing Christian
and you had to look at that history and
look at that legacy and feel that it
that it's your history that it's that
it's your legacy all right the
notre-dame Cathedral in downtown Paris
that's not its function it's not asking
those questions and to pretend that it
is would be like confusing a museum
about the history of slavery with an
actual ongoing slave trading market okay
the agenda of the Catholic Church and
the purpose of that institution with its
multi-million dollar budget in the
middle of downtown Paris is not to bring
about enlightenment and the secular
society that the French Revolution and
the French Constitution are committed to
it is not clear to me to what extent
Emmanuel macron really knowingly and
consciously and intentionally wants to
throw away the separation of church and
state that they have in France and
there's a very complex dance for how
public funds get used to restore
religious temples in France given their
constitutional history going back to the
French Revolution of 1789 and Napoleon
and that whole story that there is
really supposed to be a secular
government that is neither involved in
building and beautifying and maintaining
French churches nor mosques nor Hindu
temples nor any other any other
religions structure there they're
supposed to be committed to this there's
a broader problem here my girlfriend
asked me a couple of weeks ago what I
thought in principle about the question
of governments taking away land from
private landowners and I told her that
time this is something my own thinking
is had to mature about over the years
growing up in Canada
it's very easy to imagine that anytime
the state steps over the line and takes
away private property ownership from
people that the state is doing a
horrendous and criminal thing our
history in Canada
the main memory we have the main idea we
have associated with the government
taking away people's land is of course
the government depriving indigenous
people of their land today in Ontario
it's not the case that white people pay
rent to a Cree or a jib way landowner
it's not native people who are the
wealthy landowners today in Montreal
you're not gonna hear white people
complaining that they have a mohawk
landlord that's not what happened in our
country the land was taken away from the
people who owned it and it of course it
changed the whole oyster the country in
various places it was cultural genocide
or outright genocide history unfolds
dead in Hawaii it's actually a much more
recent history that's very well
documented of exactly how the American
government decided to take away land for
the indigenous people of Hawaii and
that's why it's very rare to have people
in Hawaii tell you oh that they're you
know the native people are becoming rich
that it's the indigenous people are
becoming multi millionaires out of the
urbanization and tourism development in
Hawaii okay so that's our history with
very negative associations with the
concept of government intervening on
private property on land ownership okay
likewise probably you watching this
video wherever you are if you just think
about government intervening and
religion it probably has a negative
connotations you probably think that any
progressive right minded person believes
in the separation of church and state
but then that once religion is separate
that it just continues in perpetuity
unmolested uncontrolled by the
Constitution or government with by any
intervention and that in this sense the
notre-dame Cathedral and a hundred other
cathedrals should go on taking up a big
part of the landscape a big part of the
geography of Paris and every city in
France forever and ever and ever and
that they should take up a big part of
the taxpayers dollars forever and ever
so that the gold is always shining on
that reliquary so that everything is
maintaining restored and look guys
things burn down Sicily it's gonna
happen once today it's the dr. dam
Cathedral a couple years ago one of the
Queen's palaces Queen's Ballroom in
England burned Queen of England there
was this question how many millions of
dollars should be put into restoring
this and
is it worth it cultural heritage
maintaining cultural heritage forever
and ever doesn't mean just one fire or
just one repair okay the budget goes on
forever and ever but the problem is if
you believe in the principle but the
government should never take land away
from landowners that means that you
believe in aristocracy and that
aristocracy should go on forever never
in all these countries in France Germany
zone they have a history of aristocrats
and if the land wasn't taken away from
aristocrats and given to other people
then the country absolutely could not
make progress whether you're talking
about Europe or Canada or Australia or
anywhere else you always have an
ever-increasing dynamic of smaller and
smaller numbers of people owning more
and more of the land and this is not new
was already discussed at length and
depth by Aristotle Aristotle in ancient
Athens they already had this problem
they observed it many times and they
observed that they needed government
periodically to take land away from the
rich and give it to the poor or else
democracy would degenerate into
feudalism a small number of aristocrats
would own everything worth owning a few
powerful families would control the
whole of Athens or Sparta or whatever
that the city might be there's already
known thousands of years ago this
pattern so on the one hand if you ever
want positive cultural change if you
ever want to move past the legacy of the
Dark Ages in Europe then you have to
believe in the government stepping in at
some point and putting an end to exactly
what the notre-dame cathedral represents
and exactly what it really is no that
doesn't mean the notre-dame Cathedral
has to be replaced with a parking lot
the notre-dame Cathedral could be
replaced with a museum a museum that
really merits taxpayers funding
taxpayers dollars that really explores
and really examines what was wrong with
the Dark Ages and the legacy of the the
church that built an amphitheater well
examines why people went on these long
pilgrimages to see this piece of
this piece of wood that really is a kind
of religious fraud that they imagined
was you know part of the cross that
Jesus was hung on and and and the the
crazy rationalizations they made up in
their own minds for living in a society
where people were constantly torturing
one another to death in in the name of
this faith a religion that was
constantly at war with itself and
constantly war with the whole outside
world until one day in France there was
a revolution the people stood up and
said no more that the power of the
church would come to an end okay this is
the problem we're living in 2019 when
when is the power of the church gonna
come to an end in principle it may sound
evil to talk about the government taking
away private party ball the government
abrogating the right of private
properties over the government
abrogating the rights of religion what
what is the right of religion what is
the right of private property if the
right of private property is for the
rich to get richer is for aristocrats to
own land in perpetuity is for the class
of people in each generation who happen
to get wealthy to amass land ownership
and then pass it on to their descendants
forever and ever
uninterrupted then you you can just look
at the situation where now and look
ahead in the next 100 years and see very
clearly what that will do to the society
even if it's just at random that in each
generation a few people become multi
millionaires what impact that will have
okay and what will be the change in the
next 100 years
if the accumulated wealth the
accumulated splendor even of the
Catholic Church if that never is
abrogated if that's never challenged if
that's never changed and if it's not
going to be the government then who it's
not the case that Starbucks can ever buy
the no TRADOC Cathedral this is not a
problem that the private sector
can intervene in or change it may sound
cold
it may sound bleak it may sound
terrifying but the burning down of the
notre-dame Cathedral is an opportunity
for something positive to happen for
something better to replace it for some
kind of step forward some kind of
culture and political change for France
and it's terrifying for me to see
Emmanuel macron standing up without a
word of criticism from anyone not from
the professional internet atheists not
from the left-wing not from the
right-wing for him to stand up and say
no everything should be rebuilt exactly
as it was apparently a taxpayers expense
that's not clear who's gonna pay for it
that the money should be furnished so
that the notre-dame cathedral can remain
a symbol of France forever and ever and
ever that that's not the future of
France that's not the President of
France and that's not even the history
of France since you wrote your
constitution or since you wrote your
first constitution in the French
Revolution that's a very sad and and
shameful thing look guys just to just to
put this in perspective you know what
what if there was a fire in Toronto that
burned down the CN tower the CN Tower
was once to tell us structure in the
world it's telling what if there was a
fire at random and they say you know
what now it's not structurally sound
it would just cost millions of millions
of dollars to rebuild the CN tower in
downtown drone CN tower has none of
these connotations it's not linked to
the history of slavery and feudalism and
Christianity it's not a piece of the one
true cross for Catholics that worship
there's none of these none of these
issues that you're just a you know what
I think the really mature thing would be
for the people to run understand and say
you know what the CN tower was a symbol
of the City of Toronto for a certain
period of time you know what
now that period of time is over we can
do better we can do something new we can
have a new symbol of a new building you
know what let's let it go let's demolish
it let's take it down we can live with
other CN tower the CN tower is not real
a symbol of the City of Toronto now or
what it's gonna be
or what's gonna become you know what
let's let's have some detachment the CN
towers is supposed to be here okay might
be hard to do but I think that would
actually be bold political leadership
and that would show and and again you
can you can propose something better you
can look at the millions and perhaps
billions of dollars you need to rebuild
the CN tower so you know what we don't
we need to relive this ideal left over
from the 1970s you know what what our
city is all about it can be it can be
something else all right
but in this case in France in France the
country that's committed to secularism
lazy day to separation of church and
state what could be more saddening than
hearing that the notre-dame Cathedral is
supposed to be the symbol for Paris the
symbol for France for the French nation
not 500 years ago and not 1,000 years
ago
but now and in the future forever and
ever and ever and at taxpayers expense
this is the opposite of a commitment to
positive progress this is a commitment
to stasis and in 2019 apparently there
was just no public appetite for someone
to stand up and make a better suggestion